---
layout: post
title: Preparing images for the web
tags: snippets, images
---

Preparing images from your camera or smartphone for using them in a weblog
or somewhere else on the web can be a mess.

Since I am not much into reworking the images I like to use automated procedures,
and therefore tend to use the commandline as much as possible.  
All the tools mentioned in this post here can be installed using the typical
package managers of your system (e.g. [brew](https://brew.sh/) for macOS or
apt/aptitude for Debian).

Here are my typical steps for recurring tasks:

## resizing images

Tool of choice is `convert` from the [ImageMagick](http://www.imagemagick.org/script/index.php) tools.

``` sh
 % find . -name '*.jpg' -exec convert {} -resize 1200x1200 -quality 80 -auto-orient {} \;
```

Make sure to use `auto-orient` especially if you took your photos with an iPhone!

__Attention:__ this overwrites your original images, so make sure you are working on copies!

### macOS

MacOS ships his own tool for such tasks: `sips`. It is working in a similar way, but the
generated images are way larger and look worse...

``` sh
 % find -name '*.jpg' -exec sips -Z 1000 {} --out {} \;
```

### graphical

The macOS Preview application offers a buildin batch resizer:
 * mark all images
 * open in Preview (Apple+O)
 * select all thumbnails (with same orientation) in sidebar
 * select _Tools_ --> _Adjust Size_
 * now you can select either width or height (thats why you only selected thumbnails with same orientation)
 * the file sizes with this method are also worse than with ImageMagick

## removing EXIF data

To remove EXIF-data (interesting stuff such as shutter speed, aperture but also
    scary stuff like GPS, exact date and time of creation, Camera serial number)
    we use the tool `exiftool` (what a appropriate name).

To remove all EXIF data of all `jpg` files in your folder just do:

``` sh
 % exiftool -all= -overwrite_original *.jpg
```

If you are using an iPhone, make sure to `-auto-orient` the image (see above) before
removing the EXIF-data.


## renaming many files in one go

`exiftool` can also be used to rename files based on EXIF-data.  
This can be helpful for renaming from the format of e.g. Canon-cameras (`IMG_1234.jpg`)
to a more readable format containing date and time (`IMG_20171123_164901.jpg`):

``` sh
% exiftool -P '-filename<CreateDate' -d IMG_%Y%m%d_%H%M%S%%-c.%%le *
```

Fore more generic renaming most OSes/file-managers offer more or less good
solutions, I really like [rangers](http://nongnu.org/ranger/) `:bulkrename` command.


## deleting redundant folders and files

When you are switching from any previous CMS or pagebuilder it can be handy to
be able to delete all subdirectories and files of a given directory (e.g.
    autogenerated thumbnails).

``` sh
% find . -mindepth 2 -type d -exec rm -r {} \;
```
